The closer you are to the machine God,
the more [laughter]
its voice whispers in your ear, right?
>> That's right.
Yeah, I don't think the Beijing is an
AGI pill.
>> [music]
>> Kyle Chan, welcome to Interesting Times.
Great to be here. So, at the moment
there really only [music] two countries
that matter for the AI future.
The United States and China. [music]
Their leaders are meeting in Beijing and
the atmosphere is sort of similar to a
kind of cold war atmosphere where people
[music]
think and argue and talk about them
being in a kind of arms race. We're
leading China. We're leading China by a
lot. China knows that.
>> I think at the moment China is winning.
There's no second place. It's either
going to be the United States or China.
You are an expert on China and AI and
we're going to talk about that race.
Who's winning? What winning even means.
Whether it even makes sense to talk
about the US and China in terms of a
race.
But I wanted to start with a basic
question. How is China's current
approach to AI different from the
American approach?
It's quite different, actually. So, in
the US
there's a particular focus on AGI,
artificial general intelligence, and to
create something approaching an
artificial super intelligence. Some kind
of almost machine God that can do
virtually everything that any human can
do at least
>> And more. And more.
And more. That's right. You want to get
more, right? That's that's [laughter]
the super part. Absolutely. And you can
see that the amount of spending, the
amount of investment, the amount of
effort that the American big tech
companies
um and their, you know, quote unquote
startups like OpenAI and Anthropic,
which are now close to trillion dollars
each, are pouring into this
um is an indication that they're making
a big bet that they can get there at
some point, maybe in the near future.
That's the race to AGI in the US. China
is running a different kind of race. I
would argue they're running multiple
races.
On the one hand, they are trying to
produce better and better AI models.
They do want to try to keep pace with
their American competitors.
But, that's not all they're focused on.
They're also focused on efficiency,
making these models smaller, cheaper to
run, easier to deploy. That's one area.
Another area they're focused on is
diffusion, trying to get AI into the
hands of as many users as possible. And
part of that strategy involves open
source, right? So, this involves kind of
giving away your models for free.
Um, and that allows other people around
the world, including in Silicon Valley,
to download Chinese models and to also
customize them and tweak them based on
their own data and to make them work in
a way that's more tailored to their own
needs. So, that's the advantage of open
source.
And another major area that China's
focused on is applications.
Specifically, robotics is a huge area
focus both for the government and for
Chinese AI companies. But, you don't
really hear so much about AGI. You might
hear some of the Chinese tech founders
talk about this and they sometimes sound
a little similar to their counterparts
in the US. But, overall, they're much
more focused on these sort of nuts and
bolts, uses and applications of AI in
people's daily lives. That's the key
priority. So, if I went to Shanghai or
Beijing right now and spend a couple
weeks there
interacting with physical reality and
digital reality do you think I would
notice a big AI-driven difference versus
life in the United States? Just
describe like the everyday experience of
this strategy to the extent that it
makes a difference in how people are
living. Yeah, so in the larger cities in
China, you might see
um autonomous delivery robots
um dealing with package deliveries, food
deliveries. Um you might see in a
restaurant
uh a waiter robot bringing your food.
This is not super super widespread yet,
but it's starting to uh to come about.
Um hotels rather than having room
service be delivered by a person uh
pushing a cart coming up the elevator,
it might be a delivery robot. Um you
have of course the self-driving cars.
You might even have drone delivery for
coffee or food. But it would be a a
subtle but probably surprising
difference to what most Americans
experience in terms of their interaction
with AI in the physical world. So let's
just pause for context cuz you talked
about the government versus the Chinese
AI companies, right? And I think most
viewers and listeners are accustomed to
the American situation where you have a
set of big companies. They have been
extremely lightly regulated by
Washington D.C. And just in the last
year we've started to get into dynamics
where the Pentagon especially seems
concerned about their national security
implications. There's talk about
regulation screening of models and so
on. But but basically it's been a very
traditionally American capitalist
environment, not a Manhattan Project or
anything like that.
To what ex- tent is China similar or
different just in the relationship
between the companies and what is
obviously a much more powerful and often
repressive state?
Yeah, so in China the state is in charge
or specifically I should say the party
state, right? The Chinese Communist
Party and the various government
agencies that they oversee. They're the
ones who set the rules. They're the ones
who ultimately are shaping the
trajectory of China's AI industry. They
have quite strict regulations. For
example, requiring AI models to be
registered in advance. They have certain
content and censorship
rules that must be followed.
They have a whole host of ways to
enforce their rules, have leverage over
Chinese AI companies.
And there are echoes back to a previous
era where they cracked down, Chinese
regulators cracked down on Chinese
internet companies for example. So,
that's sort of the overarching
relationship. But, that doesn't mean
that the Chinese AI labs themselves are
just in lockstep following whatever
Beijing says.
You know, ironically, China tried a more
top-down model to technology in a
previous era and that failed miserably.
It did not produce the kind of
innovation and flexibility and agility
in the marketplace that you would need
to have cutting-edge technology.
>> What what era are we talking about with
the more top-down approach?
>> So, I mean that was I would argue going
back to the Mao era.
This is the classic
>> Deng, pre 1980s, right?
>> Exactly. Yeah, that's sort of almost
Soviet command economy style approach.
So, what you have is sort of a hybrid
model in China, if I could characterize
it in a single word. And that would be
this sort of broader direction and
guidance and certainly support from the
central government in China as well as
local governments on the one hand. But
then also trying to create space for
competition and innovation from the
Chinese AI labs themselves. Whether
you're talking about, you know, China's
equivalent of the big tech like Alibaba
or Tencent, the maker of WeChat, the
popular super app.
Or you're talking about China's own AI
startups like Z.ai or Moonshot, which
have become actually quite popular
around the world.
>> So, what what are the what are the
Chinese equivalents, to the extent there
are, of an Anthropic or an OpenAI right
now? That's a good question. So,
maybe DeepSeek would be the closest. Um
and then you have the smaller startups.
And by smaller I mean like on the order
of 40 to 50 billion dollar market cap.
Uh and those are some of the more
successful ones. But it's hard to find
that kind of middle ground. Uh Deep Seek
now is preparing to take in outside
investment. Remember, they were actually
not originally an AI company. They were
part of a hedge fund actually that was
trying to use AI to develop more
sophisticated uh financial models. So,
they're sort of a category unto
themselves. And all of these companies
that are operating under some basic
constraints that don't apply to US
companies right now. Mostly mostly
around chips. So, can you describe just
describe that the landscape of
constraint in China and what it means?
Yeah, so I had mentioned earlier that
Chinese AI companies are trying to run
uh different races. One of those was
efficiency. And part of that is in
response to the constraints that they're
under. In particular around compute and
chips. So, remember right now um the US
has export controls on our most advanced
semiconductors made by basically Nvidia.
Um and we stopped those from officially
being sold in China. Um we allow the
sale of watered-down versions. Um but
the idea is that we keep the best and
the most advanced chips for American AI
companies in the United States and and
and for allies and partners. Um for
China, that means that they don't have
access to the most cutting-edge AI
chips. They have some Chinese domestic
alternatives. And this is a big part of
the story, right? One of the leading
players in the space is Huawei, right?
The heavily sanctioned Chinese tech
giant that um rose first in the telecom
space, branched into smartphones, and is
now in pretty much every other industry.
Electric vehicles, uh clean technology,
and certainly now AI and chips. So,
China's trying to build up their own
capacity for developing AI chips on
their own, not just designing them, but
actually producing them.
But, the problem is they're just not
quite as good as the Nvidia chips. And
without that, it does put a lot of
constraints on what they can do. So,
they're trying to squeeze more out of
very limited compute. Why aren't their
chips as good? I know this is a
simple-minded question, but is it just
that Nvidia is so
awesome at engineering, and China's
engineers, even if they have an Nvidia
chip, can't quite get there themselves?
Like Talk Talk to me Talk to me like a
non-chip specialist.
>> is the $5 trillion question, which is
currently, I think, roughly the market
cap of Nvidia
today.
Um there's a couple different aspects to
this. One is actually the chip
fabrication, that is producing the
chips. Remember, Nvidia doesn't make
their own chips. TSMC in Taiwan, they're
the ones that make the chips.
>> Conveniently located not that not that
far from China. Yes. That's right.
That's right. Um to the consternation of
probably a lot of folks in Washington
and and maybe other folks uh dependent
on those supply chains. But TSMC has
been pushing the boundaries for
increasingly advanced semiconductors in
a whole range of areas, and that
includes AI. And Nvidia, by partnering
with TSMC, can combine some of the best
design work out there with some of the
best production capabilities. For
example, ASML, a Dutch company that, you
know, maybe some people have heard of,
it's actually one of the biggest tech
companies in Europe now. Um they make
these extremely precise, extremely
expensive um lithography machines for
basically kind of printing uh chips. And
they're the only ones in the world that
can make this kind of machine.
They sell those to TSMC. TSMC can use
that cutting-edge technology combined
with their own cutting-edge
manufacturing processes and work with
Nvidia to produce these incredible
state-of-the-art chips that keep getting
better and better. So, So, just
essentially then when we talk about the
US not allowing Nvidia to sell to China,
we're effectively talking about the US
cutting China out of just a larger
supply chain, Absolutely.
>> that runs through Taiwan, through the
Netherlands, through all all around the
world.
>> Absolutely.
>> Okay. That's That's interesting and very
helpful. Um what does China have going
for it then
then in terms of AI build-out that the
US doesn't have?
Energy is absolutely absolutely huge in
China. And this is something that if
you're thinking about the broader AI
stack, that is not just the chips or the
models themselves, but deeper down on
the layer, energy is perhaps the most
important and least talked about um for
the US as a major bottleneck. It's very
hard now for data centers to build out
the power capacity to power all those
chips that they're that they're putting
together. In China,
uh interestingly, um they've been
building out energy at a very rapid pace
um clean energy, solar, wind, batteries,
and they're trying to leverage that
ongoing energy build-out to feed into
their compute build-out, which then
feeds into their AI development. And so,
you see really interesting sort of
strategies that the Chinese are taking.
For example, they have this effort to
try to build data centers out in the
western provinces away from the
high-population urban areas in China.
And at first, that might not make any
sense, right? Don't you want to have
your data centers close to where people
are actually using them? Don't you want
to have that low latency, you know, high
response time? And what China's trying
to do is they're trying to leverage a
lot of their renewable energy resources
out in those further off regions.
They're also trying to just do sort of
good old-fashioned geographical
redistribution, um, concerned always
about having these poorer provinces
remain poor while the high-tech
Shenzhens and Shanghais, you know, speed
on ahead. So, this is another area where
they're trying to leverage some of their
strengths to feed into maybe areas where
they're weaker. So, then China is
to sort of simplify, imagining a future
where
they're only a little bit behind the US.
And
actually, say say what that means.
People talk about,
you know, the best Chinese models are 3
months behind the US or 6 months behind
the US.
How far behind are they and what does
that mean in practice?
Overall, I think the consensus is
Chinese models are somewhere between 3,
6 to 9 months, depending on the time of
year and which was the latest model that
just came out. Um,
what that means is that when you look at
specific benchmarks, um, specific
evaluations for trying to understand how
well these perform on say math or coding
tasks or even sort of new agentic tasks,
um, the Chinese models that are released
today are starting to get close to the
American models that were released, you
know, a couple months back. So, that's
what that that lead time means. But, the
thing is
it's not just about having the absolute
most cutting-edge model because you can
have very, very strong models that can
do a lot, that can do a lot of agentic,
useful tasks, like, um, maybe create a
whole PowerPoint presentation for you
base and do all the research and
analysis that goes into that, um, or
answer your emails. So, there's this uh,
strategy, I think, right now in China
where they're hoping that it's not just
all about having the very best models,
that it's about trying to figure out
where to make this work and also to
build kind of the broader ecosystem for
deploying these models, to integrate
them into more and more services like
into food delivery or into ride hailing
or into, you know, again, much more
practical sort of real-world
applications. So, in the US, obviously,
there's just a lot of anxiety around AI
to a greater degree than any sort of big
technological change in my lifetime,
certainly. There's apocalyptic fears, uh
there's economic fears about job
displacement, there's social and
cultural fears, there's people who just
don't want data centers built in their
backyard. So, there's a whole range of
different moods. If you were going to
try and distill the mood in China, the
public mood around AI, how would you
describe it and how is it different from
the US?
I think the biggest anxiety right now in
China is an anxiety around falling
behind on technology. So, I think in the
US, there's a lot of worries about job
displacement
uh of AI being a net negative force in
society.
Um in China, there are some of those
concerns and I can come back to that.
But, I think right now um the fear among
individuals and companies and workers is
that they're not keeping pace with AI,
that they're not using it enough, and
they're not savvy enough with this new
technology so that they won't be
competitive enough in the in the labor
marketplace. So, and it's interesting
this sort of anxiety at the individual
level kind of mirrors China's anxiety at
the national level. Um when ChatGPT
first came out, and in fact, you can you
can even go back to when AlphaGo first
defeated the world champion human world
champion in Go,
>> Wow.
Wow, wow, wow.
there was a lot of anxiety in China
uh among China's AI industry and among
policymakers in Beijing worried that
China was also falling behind, that they
were not making the most of this new
transformative technology. So, it's
interesting to see this kind of
mirroring where it's not about um how do
I keep out this technology from my life?
It's about how do I bring it in even
more and integrate it and give myself
that edge in a very, very crowded
marketplace. And is that is it So, I see
that attitude in the US, but it is a
very Silicon Valley tech and
tech-adjacent attitude, right? Right. It
is, you know, it's spreading, but you
you see it in a pretty confined zone of
the American economy. But, are you
saying that in China it is just much
more widespread, right? That you you
don't have to be working for Deep Seek
or working for Alibaba or something to
have this have this like, am I falling
behind? I must add AI protocols mindset?
That's right. Yeah, so it's interesting
that AI is hitting uh at a time when
China was already experiencing a whole
bunch of anxieties around labor markets,
especially for uh young college
graduates. Um so, for example, the
unemployment rate for um for uh young
people in China is basically double what
it is in the United States. Uh it's
something close to 17%, which is
extremely high. Um the number of new
college graduates hitting the job market
um this year alone is 12 million plus uh
in China. These are all people competing
for many of the same jobs. They don't
want to work in the factories. They
don't want to have those blue-collar
jobs or delivery jobs. They want, you
know, in their minds the good jobs. And
they're worried that if they don't keep
up with AI, they might not be able to to
get those. So, it's it's a
longer-standing concern about this
hyper-competitive
environment in China that has been there
since as long as I've been going to
China, but AI really sort of amplifies
and accelerates those anxieties. And I
mean, part of the debate in the US has
also been about the welfare state, and
you have, you know, tech leaders talking
about
sort of how the welfare state has to
adapt if there is AI-driven
unemployment. You have Elon Musk
promising not universal basic income,
but universal high income. I just like
saying that.
Um China does not have a safety net to
any degree like the United States or
like Western Europe, right? Is there a
welfare state debate in China, a UBI
debate, anything like that? Increasingly
so. I mean, the great irony here is, you
know, speaking about the Mao era
earlier,
um that is the era of the iron rice
bowl, of the idea that you were a worker
at a state firm, at a state
organization, and you basically had your
job for life. Um and this idea of job
security is no longer there in China,
unless you're working for, again, a
state-owned enterprise or within the
government. Um and so that concern is
coming back, and there's actually more
discussion now, including among policy
folks in Beijing, about the potential
issues related to AI job displacement
and what China should do about it from a
welfare and and policy standpoint. So
far, I mean, are there like sort of
actual policy ideas sort of in the wind?
Is Is there a, you know, UBI under
communist conditions? [laughter]
It's It's still early stages. From each
according to his ability, to each
according to his need.
>> That's right. It's going to come back.
>> [laughter]
>> To get rich is glorious, but also
But also, they are the Chinese Communist
Party, after all. Um yeah, I think it's
still early days for that discussion,
and there's still a pivot that's
happening from the sort of all-in, you
know, hit the gas pedal on AI progress,
including from the policy makers, where
they were emphasizing, you know, all the
new jobs that would be created by AI.
You know, don't worry about those other
jobs that might be affected. You know,
that's part of the industrial revolution
that's happening now, industrial
revolution 4 or 5.0. Um but now now that
conversation starting to shift. And what
about the central government's concern
about social effects of AI? Because one
one notable thing in China, you
mentioned earlier, the crackdown on
internet companies, there was and has
been a deep anxiety about the internet's
effect on social life. You've had
attempts to write crackdown on video
gaming among young men. All all of the
things that sort of American
commentators worry about at a sort of
speculative level have actually
sometimes been
been actual policies in China. And this
is connected to the reality that China
has a bigger problem than the US with
falling birth rates, falling marriage
rates. Are China's leaders looking at AI
through that lens and worrying about,
you know, the AI girlfriend, AI
boyfriend future? Definitely. They are
very worried about that. And in fact,
they are already rolling out policies
and regulations around AI boyfriends and
AI girlfriends. You know, it's so funny.
They They like [snorts] they have a very
sort of um
uh negative view of wasting time,
basically. If what they see, the folks
in Beijing, what they see as sort of
non-productive
activity. And in that earlier era of a
tech crackdown, you know, they saw video
games as not really part of the Chinese
vision for a, you know, high-growth,
technologically powered future when
everyone's at home playing playing video
games. And they also cracked down on the
education market. Um so, there was a lot
of private tutoring, edtech startups
were were sort of sprouting up. And they
saw that as also kind of wasteful cuz it
was sort of a race to the bottom in
terms of preparing for exams and feeding
into that kind of cutthroat academic
environment. So, I think right now we're
seeing something similar happen again
with worries that AI companions could
end up being a big time sink for Chinese
youth when they should be engineering
the future and building up the startups
and the future Chinese versions of
SpaceX, for example.
But is there also a sense that this is
the solution if China never fixes its
birth rate? That That robots are just
the way that aging low birth rate
societies
compete? Is that Is that also part of
the the theory or the mindset?
Definitely. That's a big part of the
story. So, China has a shrinking
workforce. I think their labor force uh
size peaked actually over a decade ago.
And they're heavily dependent on
manufacturing. They don't want to let
that go. Uh they see that as the engine
for the whole economy.
Um so, how do you reconcile those two
factors when people don't want those
factory jobs anymore uh and young people
want sort of different jobs uh and
there's just not enough people to fill
the factories. One solution is robots.
One solution is to increasingly automate
factory production to put robots of many
different kinds, whether they're your
classic six-arm industrial uh six-axis
industrial robot arm
>> The classic [clears throat] six-armer.
>> You know, that can lift up a you know, a
car in in one go. Or now this big push
with humanoid robots is seen as being
yet another potential solution, if not a
perfect solution, to this ongoing labor
issue. So, China wants to continue to
become more and more competitive, to
move up the value chain, and to make
better and more high-value stuff, but
they don't have the workforce. So, AI
and robotics is seen as as the way to
fill that in. Yeah, it's it's
interesting just thinking about you
mentioned like robot waiters, right? So,
one thing that has been sort of
encouraging, I think, to people worried
about job displacement in the US is the
extent to which robotics in restaurants,
fast-food places, supermarkets, and so
on has not so far radically displaced
human workers. And in fact, places like
McDonald's and Starbucks that have tried
to sort of
really, you know, move to kind of
automatic ordering and so on have often
found themselves sort of maintaining
human staff beyond what they expected or
expanding human staff even.
In the in a context though where like
the Chinese birth rate is maybe 2/3 the
US birth rate at this point depending on
which stats you look at,
you're just in a different landscape,
right? Where you're maybe you're
worrying less about whether the robot
waiter displaces workers and more about
whether you have a waiter at all. And
so, the robot waiter
is welcome and necessary. I mean, that
that that seems like it could be a big
point of
sort of
divergence ultimately between how the US
and China relates to robots.
>> Yeah, definitely. It's like you're going
to have to air on this on one side or
the other. You're going to have to air
on the side of going too slow and then
you may not have the ability to do all
these things because there's not enough
workers there. Or you may air on the
side of going too fast and I feel like
that's the concern in the US more.
Let's pull up to to the back back to the
AGI superintelligence question. How do
you think China's leaders actually think
about
the American fixation
or the
tech world Sam Altman, Dario Amodei
fixation on on AGI? Is it an Two
options, you can tell me if there's a
third, right? One option is that
the Chinese basically think that our
tech companies are high on their own
supply. That there is not, you know,
that there's never going to be some
insane return to super intelligence, and
it's always going to be fine to be, you
know, 3 to 6 months behind, but then you
have catch-up.
Another option would be that China is
actually worried about super
intelligence and is basically trying to
figure out what are our contingency
plans if the Americans seem to be
pulling much further ahead.
Do either of those describe
China's mindset to the extent that you
can you can sort of read the tea leaves
in Beijing?
>> So, I mean, one, you know, sort of
interesting corollary question is
is China trying to do an AGI Manhattan
Project somewhere
buried underground in a bunker with data
centers that can't be seen by satellites
and powered by
>> Yes. Yes, are they?
>> [laughter]
>> And my inclination is no. And you don't
>> Do you think they could do something
like that without the US being aware of
it? So, I don't think that they would be
able to do that without the US being
aware. I think that it would require
such a scale of production, of amassing
resources, and construction that we
would detect something, and we would
start to wonder what is going on. And I
mean, we're already watching everything
about the nuclear build-out, for
example, in China, nuclear weapons
build-out. So, I I would I would be very
doubtful that we would miss something of
that scale, cuz you really would need
massive scale in terms of computing
energy to power something that would be
like a Manhattan Project for AGI. So,
they're not they're not secretly trying
to win the race. Whatever they're doing,
they are sort of accepting this position
of being in our draft on the racetrack
or whatever metaphor you want for now,
right? But
is that just making a virtue of
necessity,
or do they think that we're deluding
ourselves in our in our race to to super
intelligence?
I think they just see the technology
quite differently and they just don't
have that kind of um transcendent view
of
technology. I think that um you can see
this in other approaches that they've
taken to the internet or to the IT
revolution which they were obsessed with
as well. Um so they were really focused
on just trying to integrate the internet
and IT infrastructure into just basic
services, education, health care,
government services and I think they see
something similar with with AI now. You
know, one thing that I one kind of
thought experiment I often uh think
about is what would be the signs that
they were trying to do a secret AGI
program?
And one of the signs I think would be
about those Nvidia chips that I
mentioned earlier. Um where right now uh
Trump has relaxed some of the export
controls and allowed H200 Nvidia chips
to be sold to China. Those are better
than what China had gotten before but
not the very best. And China's basically
said
thanks but no thanks. The AI companies
to be sure in China really really want
those chips. But here's the divergence
because Beijing
they don't necessarily want to be
dependent on the US and they want to
bolster their own semiconductor program.
So if they were really sprinting today
for AGI, I think they would have gobbled
up those chips as quickly as possible
not knowing when that window might
close. So that is one sort of indicator
um that they are kind of seeing this as
a medium to long term bet. Um So so
there might be people at Deep Seek who
believe in the super intelligence future
more strongly than people in Beijing.
Yes. Yeah, I think um the AI
>> you are to the machine god, the more
[laughter] its voice whispers in your
ear, right? That's right.
Yeah, I don't think they Beijing is a
AGI pilled. What about What about
espionage, which obviously played a big
role in the early Cold War arms race
with nuclear secrets?
Is there an equivalent sort of spy-based
solution
for China if the US seems to be pulling
too far ahead?
So, there is something called
distillation, and that's where you take
a weaker model, and you actually train
it on the outputs of a stronger model.
And distillation is a common practice
for AI developers when it's done with
full knowledge and full disclosure and
and total authorization. What seems to
be happening now is some of the Chinese
AI labs seem to be distilling on
American AI models without
authorization, and they're using, it
seems,
a number of different sort of proxy
accounts so they can get around efforts
to block these campaigns. So, it's sort
of
>> not That doesn't require stealing
secrets from Anthropic. Like, it just
requires
using the Anthropic model in a way that
you're not supposed to be able to use
it. That's right.
>> Right. It's sort of its own category.
It's not quite like outright IP theft.
It's not like taking the source code for
from Anthropic or OpenAI. It It hearkens
back a little bit to an era where, you
know, Microsoft was always trying to cut
down on black market copies of Windows
and and Microsoft Office. Does it work?
In the sense that like, can you you
know, can you just have a Chinese Claude
distilled that works as well as Claude?
So, it can help somewhat, but you need
to have that foundation to start with.
So, I think that this is probably one
area where it'll be hard still to get
concrete data on exactly what the net
effect is.
But I would say that if you or I were
building a model from scratch, we would
not be able to use distillation as a way
to catch up to the frontier. If you were
one of the better Chinese AI labs, you
might be able to use some of this to
improve your model, especially on areas
where you're weaker, like uh on coding,
for example, you might be able to use uh
Anthropic's
um Claude models to support your
long-term coding capabilities. So, there
is that aspect to this whole uh AI race.
In a world where
there is some kind of takeoff. And and I
should say, one of the theories that
animates the American AI companies
is the idea that at a certain level, the
AIs start training the new AIs, and you
get this kind of acceleration where
suddenly being 3 or 6 months behind,
>> [snorts]
>> it becomes impossible to catch up.
Again, this would be the theory.
Suppose that starts to happen.
Does China just invade Taiwan?
>> [laughter]
>> Like we'll we'll seriously, right? Like
you you have I mean, this is just a kind
of fascinating circumstance that
you have a kind of arms race. Maybe
China doesn't think of it as an arms
race, but it is sitting next door to a
central hub in the supply chain that
makes the arms race
possible. Right? Like Like is that
is that the natural Chinese move in the
event that they seem to be falling
incredibly behind?
>> So, I think ironically, if that were
really starting to happen, uh taking
over TSMC would be a move too late
because the chips are already made and
installed and are already running and
training the models and feeding into
this feedback loop in the United States.
So, at that point, um all bets are off
and you're kind of you're kind of out of
uh out of options um for what to do. Um
the the big question here is how fast
that can happen and whether this could
happen without being detected. Um, you
know, there's always speculation about,
you know, is there a version of the
latest AI models that hasn't been shared
even disclosed to the public in say the
US,
uh, you know, or maybe even in China,
where um, they have gotten the inkling
of this recursive feedback loop that
will lead to this super intelligence
explosion. So, that that question it's
sort of hard to know and then how
quickly can you actually get there? But
I I want you to be prescriptive for a
moment because we're having
we're having a summit. We've been
talking about sort of what China is
doing, how China is thinking and so on.
What does all of this mean
for the United States in terms of our
our policies? Does it mean that we
should treat China
as a fundamentally more
benign actor than our current policy
treats them as?
Or is it an indicator that in fact our
policy is working by shaping a Chinese
perspective that is not as engaged in
the race as it could be?
Yeah, I think
at this point what we should do is take
a step back from this all-out race
framework. Because I think right now
that race mentality is driving a kind of
recklessness, I would argue, from the
American side. Um,
to bring up like the threat of uh,
Chinese AGI, um, you know, we should
think about that, but I don't think that
that's what they're so focused on. So,
but if we're only focused on that, that
means we need to get rid of the
guardrails. We need to not bind
ourselves. We need to not have any kind
of regulation or restrictions. We need
to have as many data centers as possible
everywhere. And I think right now that
approach is starting to run into some
some problems in the United States. And,
you know, whether you're talking about
the backlash to data centers or you're
talking about now some of these models
getting so capable that they might not
be at, you know, whatever AGI level, but
they are at the level potentially of
causing greater damage either in terms
of cyber attack capabilities or maybe
even in terms of
uh augmenting what um a relatively
unsophisticated group could do with uh
bio weapons. So, there are all these
sort of questions that the AI community
has been talking about for a long time,
but certainly for the Trump
administration, if you recall, you know,
J.D. Vance's speech last year where he
said basically we should not have
hand-wringing over AI safety, slow down
the progress of American AI development.
In other words, in this trade-off, and
he viewed it as a trade-off, we should
err on the side of going faster rather
than putting on a seatbelt. And I think
now we're reaching that point where we
need to think about still making
progress as fast as possible, competing
with China, making sure we do have the
best AI models. So, that we can keep,
but does it have to come at the expense
of wearing a seatbelt or having some
basic safeguards? Would you also suggest
that the US should adopt a more Chinese
vision of the goal of diffusion and sort
of building the best
the best possible AI-enabled technology
right now? Cuz I mean a a different way
to frame this is that
the US and China are in a race, but
China thinks it's running a race to
build the self-driving cars and the
robots that every single country in the
world will use, and the US will be stuck
sitting here with its pretend machine
god, while China, you know, sells to
India, Africa, and Latin America
successfully. Do you think the US in
in being less breakneck should also be
pivoting to a
strategy of essentially integration and
sales? Yes. I think we need to focus a
lot more on deployment. One of those
areas is actually open source, which
because of the commercial incentives is
not a high priority for the top American
AI labs, right? They're focused on
selling access to their models through
subscriptions, through APIs. And the
thing is that open source approach has
been really, really powerful for these
Chinese AI models to gain adoption, not
just in China, but around the world. And
so it feels like right now the US is
seeding a really important channel of
competition. Um when it's so expensive,
it can be the most powerful AI model,
but you you don't want to pay for it. Um
that that can put limits on on your
growth.
>> Do you think you get that shift
organically if there is a slightly
stronger regulatory hand? Like cuz
again, the US does not we have
industrial policy, I'll put it in
quotation marks, right? But we we don't
have the kind of steering uh of economic
strategy that China has, right? So it's
not like you can say, "Oh,
you know, the United States should be
more focused on deployment." And there's
a button to push in Washington, D.C.
that makes that happen. But do you think
it would happen naturally if it was a
little bit harder and a little bit more
challenging just to sort of maximize
compute and capacity for existing AI
companies? I think there's a way to
tweak the incentives in a way that is
not like the Chinese approach, that is
not about a top-down steering of the
whole industry.
Um but it's more about trying to create
maybe some of that commercial or even
research space for, say, open source
models.
Um yeah, I just think right now, right?
You can think about a number of
different markets where this is
happening, where there's a focus on the
high end of the market, on consumers or
businesses that are are to pay a lot. Um
but there's less focus on sort of mass
adoption and sort of that broader
marketplace. And we we're seeing some of
this, right? Like I I should be clear
that, you know, Nvidia is trying to
release um, open source models. They
have a commercial incentive because the
more AI gets adopted, the more their
chips are needed, right? So, there's
that that closed loop there. Um, and
Google DeepMind, they have some some
relatively good uh, open source models,
but the incentive the commercial
incentives as they stand are not are not
quite there.
Do you think we should sell more chips
to China?
Like
as a sort of
token of a different a different model?
It's a very difficult
topic because anyone who tells you
yes or no on chips to China is really
flattening the whole story. On the one
hand, you do have real near-term effects
on China's ability to produce the most
cutting-edge AI models. So, by limiting
chips, that does slow down China's AI
development in the near term.
And that can be useful, for example, for
giving our companies that edge in cyber
attack capabilities, right? With Mythos
coming out, um, even a few months of
being able to test on our own systems
first is very useful versus a Chinese
model having this capability and they're
testing on our systems. Right. So,
that's important, but at the same time,
there's the other side of this whole
equation, which is
accelerating China's own chip
development, right? And that's an area
that they're they've been really focused
on and they've been focused on because
of our export controls, right? So, it
cuts both ways. In the near term, it
will slow down their AI development. In
the longer term, it could speed up at
least their ability to have a more
resilient uh, self-reliant semiconductor
supply chain that is not as affected by
US actions. So, somewhere in there is a
sweet spot and it's really about where
you draw the line rather than just
saying more chips or less chips.
>> And also how short timelines are
overall, right? And I'm just going to
make the Hawks case against against your
your case and see how you respond,
right? Cuz the the Hawk says,
you know, look, we've been at this for
an incredibly short amount of time,
right? Since the chat GPT appeared in
the pandemic, there's been tremendous
acceleration. The people who have
predicted acceleration keep being
vindicated, right? Um
and yes, if you're talking about like a
20 to 25-year
time horizon for the point at which, you
know, you sort of hit maximum
superintelligence
capacity, then yeah, you have a lot of
room to sort of figure out the optimal
regulatory balance and all of these
things.
But if you're talking about two to four
to six years,
then maintaining
a 3-to-6-month lead over your leading
rival,
uh who by the way is an authoritarian
government, right?
Seems like it may be really really
really important. And the slowdown that
you're advocating
is one that could could give up that
advantage, right? So, how would you
respond to that that kind of argument,
which seems to be the mindset that
certainly
not just people at the Pentagon, but a
lot of people in Silicon Valley have.
Yeah, so that timeline
comes up again and again. Like in so
many different debates within the US as
it relates to the US-China AI
competition. And fundamentally, um
it it's impossible to say, right, how
that timeline will play out. So, I think
for example,
>> what I yeah, I've discovered that in
[laughter] in interviewing people. Yes,
it is impossible to say. Yeah.
>> the timeline question. I mean, then it
really boils down to uh what your views
are about um this AGI timeline and how
likely this is to happen. And another
factor that I I will throw in there is
as a thought experiment, um, imagine
that China did have access to the most
cutting-edge American AI chips.
Um, would they be more AGI pill Would
would Beijing be more AGI pill? You
know, forget about Deep Seek or the
actual tech founders themselves. And
even on that, I'm not so sure that they
would be so AGI pill. That my guess
would be that they would try to deploy
certainly better models, but basically
run their current playbook just amped up
a whole bunch. Um, and and I think it
goes back to
>> their current playbook, right, like
includes cyber warfare, includes, you
know, a lot like you just mentioned the
fact that just a 3-month advantage in
the deployment of
a cyber warfare capable model like
Mythos makes a big difference. Right.
So, it's not it's not as though the
current Chinese playbook is sort of
innocent of conflict with the US. That's
right. Yeah. So, that's why I see it in
as different sets of risks. One is this
AGI risk that you're talking about. And
that I think is uh
I would I would argue has been sort of
overblown.
Um, but what I don't think has been
overblown, in fact, maybe even
underestimated up until recently is the
cyber risk and the biosecurity risk.
These are sort of more
I mean, it's kind of crazy to say this,
but these are sort of like more medium
risk relative to the AI catastrophic
like total takeover by
superintelligence. Yeah. So, those those
sort of more intermediate risks I do
worry about, and I do worry about US
competition vis-à-vis China. And so, I
think that would be to in my mind a
reason for maintaining the export
controls that we currently have,
um, and not kind of fiddling with them
and not agreeing to these side deals,
uh, with uh Xi Jinping, for example. So,
that's why I try to find that balance,
but in terms of the AGI question, that's
where I'm just less convinced that we're
really all in this sprint towards AGI,
that China is really all in this sprint
for the for AGI.
>> But even even on the medium risks, which
I agree uh seem to me to be the most
plausible risks, right? You are then
making a calculation where you're
saying,
"What am I most afraid of? Am I most
afraid of
China with the capacity to
do unprecedented cyber warfare against
the US or a rogue AI or disastrous AI
model that, you know, crashes the entire
US power grid for some inscrutable,
you know, AI-related reason, right? Like
it's that balance that you're worrying
about."
>> Yeah. Yeah, exactly. And it And it comes
to this question, too, about how the US
should engage with China about AI.
Because if we are focused just on
China's cyberattack capabilities
relative to our own,
um then you might say, "Don't bother
engaging, right? We're both in this arms
race essentially on cyber capabilities."
But if you're thinking about the rogue
agent or, say, a non-state actor using
uh either uh a set of American models, a
set of Chinese models, or maybe they
even do sort of arbitrage across, you
know, even you know, this is sort of
like maybe 4D chess, but, you know, they
deliberately are playing this
geopolitical competition uh against each
other
uh and trying to distribute an attack
across all these different models uh in
order to disguise their origins, right?
Um
those are areas where I do think that
one, it would be useful to talk to the
Chinese side about these, and two, where
I think it would be in the US national
interest. It wouldn't just be about
binding ourselves and slowing ourselves
down relative to China. It would be
about this extra third factor that, you
know, we want to take seriously.
>> And this this is a good place to end
because
a lot of people in Silicon Valley will
say, "Oh, yeah, in theory,
we could engage with China and negotiate
a sort of mutual AI slow down, but in
practice either it's not clear that
China wants to do that, wants that kind
of negotiation, or it's just
unimaginably complex to verify some sort
of
AI control agreement in the way that we
did with nuclear missiles during the
Cold War. Do you think a kind of Cold
War style ongoing AI control negotiation
with China is possible?
I think we should not have high
expectations and I certainly don't. I
think that we should start by talking.
We should start by sharing
our approach to AI safety and AI risk
mitigation. We should try to convince
the Chinese to take this more seriously
and they are starting to take this more
seriously. We should also have a
discussion about open source models
actually
cuz as those get better, right? On the
one on the one hand we want those to
diffuse more but on the other hand they
could also pose a risk if they get into
the wrong hands. So we can talk about
all those all those areas but I would be
very hesitant, certainly at this stage,
to even think about binding constraints,
verification agreements, a kind of arms
control treaty for AI between the US and
China. At this stage it's way too early.
Let's just start talking. If it's too
early for that, is it just because of
the sheer difficulty of imagining such a
thing?
Or is it a dynamic where
precisely because Beijing's attitude is
that
we're not in some Cold War style race,
they aren't actually they're actually
less interested than they otherwise
would be in that kind of negotiation?
I think overall it really boils down to
one thing, which is an extremely low
degree of trust between the US and China
and an unwillingness for either side to
subject ourselves to invasive
verification, monitoring, surveillance
by the other party. And yeah, there
could be you know, interesting technical
solutions that would make that more
feasible, but it boils down to this
geopolitical reality where we don't
trust them and they don't trust us.
And so we might be able to make progress
on areas that affect both of us, but
when it comes to you know, letting say
Chinese regulators come into the US or
letting American regulators go inspect
data centers in China,
I think that is pretty pretty far out
there at this stage. And do you think
that that only changes on the far side
of some
disaster, conflict, some sort of event?
Because I mean one one theory that I
sort of
I don't just toy with, I guess I hold,
is that a lot of the negotiations around
nuclear weapons were only possible
because they'd been used and people were
aware of how destructive they are. Is
there a world where the only way that
the US and China come to terms is a
world where something tragic has to
happen first?
Yeah, that's a scenario I think about
too. And I think about what would be the
level of incident and what could the
response be? You can you can think about
sort of a most extreme case where you
have some major cyber attack incident or
even bioweapons incident related to AI
where
there are real lives at stake, for
example.
And
that could cause both countries to just
unilaterally put a pause on all of their
AI development because they realize that
this is such a big issue with such huge
risks. That is possible.
So I do wonder and I do worry that we
might be waiting for that incident to
happen before we take action in advance,
before you even start to talk to each
other about how to take action. All
right, [music] on that somewhat dark
note, Kahl Chan, thank you for joining
me. Thank you.
>> Mhm.